Documentation/CGLF.md, before:

Compact Genome Library Format
===

This document describes a binary encoding of a tile library
for efficient storage and transport.

From a high level view, the tile library storage file has
the canonical tile sequence represented as a 2bit vector.
Tiles are represented as offsets into the canonical sequence
with tile variants represented in their own structure
as variants from the canonical tile sequence.

Much of the design is inspired by the genomic 2bit
file representation.

This library is meant to be the companion to the compact
genome format (CGF) that encodes individual genomes.


Binary tile library structure:
----


```go
CompactTileLibrary {

  Magic         16byte
  Version       8byte
  NTileSequence 8byte
  AltStride     8byte
  TagStride     8byte

  TileSequenceOffset []8byte

  TileSequence[] {

    Path          8byte
    NStep         8byte

    // TagSeqLenBp = (NStep-1)*TagStride
    //
    TagSeqTwoBit      []byte  // ~60Mb

    BodySeqLenBP      8byte
    BodySeqOffsetBp   []8byte // ~80Mb
    BodySeqTwoBit     []byte  // ~650Mb

    Span              []byte  // ~10Mb
    SpanOverflowLen   8byte
    SpanOverflow   []{
      Index             8byte
      Length            8byte
    }

    AltCache          [][AltStride]byte   // ~240Mb

    AltOverflowOffset []8byte             // ~80Mb
    AltOverflow []{                       // ?

      NAltCache     dlug      // number of alts in cache
      N             dlug      // including alts in cache
      VariantId     []dlug    // including alts in cache
      Span          []dlug    // including alts in cache
      VariantType   []dlug    // including alts in cache
      VariantIndex  []dlug    // index in appropriate structure

      AuxBodyLen          8byte     // Auxiliary body sequences
      AuxBodySeqOffsetBP  []8byte   // these positions are referenced in AltOverflowRec
      AuxBodySeqTwoBit    []byte

      AltOverflowVariantLen         8byte     // Number of tile variants in the AltOverflow position
      AltOverflowVariantRecOffset   []8byte   // Pos k holds byte offset of tile variant (k+1) in AltOverflowRec
      AltOverflowRec                []AltOverflowRecord // see below

      AltDataLen        8byte    // number of AltData entries
      AltDataOffset     []8byte  // pos k byte sum of AltData[0:k+1] (i.e. AltDataOffset[0] == len(AltData[0]))
      AltData           []byte
    }

  }

}
```

Note that multiple entries in the AlterOverlfowVariantRecOffset can point to the same AltOverflowRec entry.

The first entry in each AltOverflowRec is a dlug named `Type`. The value of `Type` determines how
the remainder of the bytes should be processed.

`Type` of 0 is an `AltOverflowTwoBitPayload` record.  A `Type` of 1 is a generic AltOverflowRecord with
payload of a 2bit gzipped file.

Explicitely:

```go
AltOverflowRec { // Type 0, 2bit alt record
  BodySeqIndex    dlug
  NAlt            dlug
  Alt[] {
    StartBP       dlug    // start of alt (0-ref, 0=start of tag)
    CanonLenBP    dlug
    AltLenBP      dlug
    SeqTwoBit     []byte  // 2bit representation of alt sequence, of len AltLenBP
  }
}
```

Magic is `{"cglf":"bin"\0\0\0`

The `*Offset*` arrays give position information into their respective variable
length structures.


There are `AltStride` bytes reserved per Alt entry.  Each of the `AltStride` bytes
(for example, 24) is allocated as follows:

```go
AltCacheRecord {
  NAlt    dlug
  Alt[] {
    StartBP       dlug    // start of alt (0-ref, 0=start of tag)
    CanonLenBP    dlug
    AltLenBP      dlug
    SeqTwoBit     []byte  // 2bit representation of alt sequence, of len AltLenBP
  }
}
```

Notes
---

  * assumes variant in AtlCache appear in order.  This could mean a common variant appears that overflows while
    the others would not but this would still be wholly represented in the overflow table.
  * Start will be in the range of 250 which will probably overflow the dlug with prob. 1/2
  * CanonLen and AltLen are going to usually be small.  Devoting a whole dlug to it is excessive.
    Originally this was supposed to be compressed into a single dlug but discarded in lieu of simplicity.
  * AltSeq is wasteful as most alts will probably be a single base pair substitution.  Maybe it would
    be better to have a single AltSeq that consolodates all Alts in the cache record.

References
---


  - [2bit encoding in closure](http://eigenhombre.com/2013/07/06/a-two-bit-decoder/)
  - [Dlugosz Variable Length Integer](http://www.dlugosz.com/ZIP2/VLI.html)

Variable length schemes will be used.  Dlugosz variable length
integer encoding seems like a fine candidate.  The basic idea
is to have a linear number of prefix bits encode the number of
bytes until a cutoff at which time it switches over to the prefix
bits describing the length of the VLE integer.  The VLE integer encoding
is slightly modified from the one presented in the Dlugosz VLI post.

The following table gives a sense for how to encode:

| prefix | bytes | header bits | data bits | unsigned range |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0 | 1 | 1 | 7 | 127 |
| 10 | 2 | 2 | 14 | 16,383 |
| 110 | 3 | 3 | 21 | 2,097,151 |
| 111 00 | 4 | 5 | 27 | 134,217,727 |
| 111 01 | 5 | 5 | 35 | 34,359,738,367 |
| 111 10 | 6 | 5 | 43 | 8,796,093,022,207 |
| 111 11 000 | 8 | 8 | 56 | 72,057,594,037,927,935 |
| 111 11 001 |  9 | 8 | 64 | A full 64-bit value with one byte overhead |
| 111 11 010 | 17 | 8 | 128 | A GUID/UUID |
| 111 11 111 |  n | 8 | any | Any multi-precision integer |

This is a nice compromise between arbitrary length and efficient encoding
for small numbers.

The document is unclear about what happens in the 0xff case for the prefix byte.
This will be resolved here by considering the next 8 bytes to encode the length
of the subsequent bytes.  So

    0xff | 0xgh 0xij 0xkl 0xmn 0xop 0xqr 0xst 0xuv [ ... ]

where [g-v] hold the number of bytes in [...].  The value (2^64)-1 in the length
field is reserved for future use.

Commit message:

VariantIndex-AltData elaboration
VariantIndex has a confusing idea of having multiple variants point to the same `AltData` record.  The `AltData` record as of now is the gzip of a twobit file, so can contain multiple records and that's why it's set up like this.  A note has been added in the `Notes` section to indicate this behavior.

Documentation/CGLF.md, after:

Compact Genome Library Format
===

This document describes a binary encoding of a tile library
for efficient storage and transport.

From a high level view, the tile library storage file has
the canonical tile sequence represented as a 2bit vector.
Tiles are represented as offsets into the canonical sequence
with tile variants represented in their own structure
as variants from the canonical tile sequence.

Much of the design is inspired by the genomic 2bit
file representation.

This library is meant to be the companion to the compact
genome format (CGF) that encodes individual genomes.


Binary tile library structure:
----


```go
CompactTileLibrary {

  Magic         16byte
  Version       8byte
  NTileSequence 8byte
  AltStride     8byte
  TagStride     8byte

  TileSequenceOffset []8byte

  TileSequence[] {

    Path          8byte
    NStep         8byte

    // TagSeqLenBp = (NStep-1)*TagStride
    //
    TagSeqTwoBit      []byte  // ~60Mb

    BodySeqLenBP      8byte
    BodySeqOffsetBp   []8byte // ~80Mb
    BodySeqTwoBit     []byte  // ~650Mb

    Span              []byte  // ~10Mb
    SpanOverflowLen   8byte
    SpanOverflow   []{
      Index             8byte
      Length            8byte
    }

    AltCache          [][AltStride]byte   // ~240Mb

    AltOverflowOffset []8byte             // ~80Mb
    AltOverflow []{                       // ?

      NAltCache     dlug      // number of alts in cache
      N             dlug      // including alts in cache
      VariantId     []dlug    // including alts in cache
      Span          []dlug    // including alts in cache
      VariantType   []dlug    // including alts in cache
      VariantIndex  []dlug    // index in appropriate structure

      AuxBodyLen          8byte     // Auxiliary body sequences
      AuxBodySeqOffsetBP  []8byte   // these positions are referenced in AltOverflowRec
      AuxBodySeqTwoBit    []byte

      AltOverflowVariantLen         8byte     // Number of tile variants in the AltOverflow position
      AltOverflowVariantRecOffset   []8byte   // Pos k holds byte offset of tile variant (k+1) in AltOverflowRec
      AltOverflowRec                []AltOverflowRecord // see below

      AltDataLen        8byte    // number of AltData entries
      AltDataOffset     []8byte  // pos k byte sum of AltData[0:k+1] (i.e. AltDataOffset[0] == len(AltData[0]))
      AltData           []byte
    }

  }

}
```

Note that multiple entries in the AlterOverlfowVariantRecOffset can point to the same AltOverflowRec entry.

The first entry in each AltOverflowRec is a dlug named `Type`. The value of `Type` determines how
the remainder of the bytes should be processed.

`Type` of 0 is an `AltOverflowTwoBitPayload` record.  A `Type` of 1 is a generic AltOverflowRecord with
payload of a 2bit gzipped file.

Explicitely:

```go
AltOverflowRec { // Type 0, 2bit alt record
  BodySeqIndex    dlug
  NAlt            dlug
  Alt[] {
    StartBP       dlug    // start of alt (0-ref, 0=start of tag)
    CanonLenBP    dlug
    AltLenBP      dlug
    SeqTwoBit     []byte  // 2bit representation of alt sequence, of len AltLenBP
  }
}
```

Magic is `{"cglf":"bin"\0\0\0`

The `*Offset*` arrays give position information into their respective variable
length structures.


There are `AltStride` bytes reserved per Alt entry.  Each of the `AltStride` bytes
(for example, 24) is allocated as follows:

```go
AltCacheRecord {
  NAlt    dlug
  Alt[] {
    StartBP       dlug    // start of alt (0-ref, 0=start of tag)
    CanonLenBP    dlug
    AltLenBP      dlug
    SeqTwoBit     []byte  // 2bit representation of alt sequence, of len AltLenBP
  }
}
```

Notes
---

  * assumes variant in AtlCache appear in order.  This could mean a common variant appears that overflows while
    the others would not but this would still be wholly represented in the overflow table.
  * Start will be in the range of 250 which will probably overflow the dlug with prob. 1/2
  * CanonLen and AltLen are going to usually be small.  Devoting a whole dlug to it is excessive.
    Originally this was supposed to be compressed into a single dlug but discarded in lieu of simplicity.
  * AltSeq is wasteful as most alts will probably be a single base pair substitution.  Maybe it would
    be better to have a single AltSeq that consolodates all Alts in the cache record.
  * Variants in the `VariantIndex` record can point to the same data index location in the `AltData` structure.
    For example, if the `AltData` structure holds the gzip of a twobit file (containing long sequences say),
    the sequences will be named in the twobit file by their full `path.ver.step.variant` name but all variants
    in the `VariantIndex` array will point to the same `AltData` index location.  If `247.00.2e47.003` and
    `247.00.2e47.009` were both stored in the same twobit file at index `0` in `AltDAta`, then `VariantIndex[3]`
    and `VariantIndex[9]` would both have values of `0`, indicating that `AltData[0]` holds both of those
    variants.


References
---


  - [2bit encoding in closure](http://eigenhombre.com/2013/07/06/a-two-bit-decoder/)
  - [Dlugosz Variable Length Integer](http://www.dlugosz.com/ZIP2/VLI.html)

Variable length schemes will be used.  Dlugosz variable length
integer encoding seems like a fine candidate.  The basic idea
is to have a linear number of prefix bits encode the number of
bytes until a cutoff at which time it switches over to the prefix
bits describing the length of the VLE integer.  The VLE integer encoding
is slightly modified from the one presented in the Dlugosz VLI post.

The following table gives a sense for how to encode:

| prefix | bytes | header bits | data bits | unsigned range |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 0 | 1 | 1 | 7 | 127 |
| 10 | 2 | 2 | 14 | 16,383 |
| 110 | 3 | 3 | 21 | 2,097,151 |
| 111 00 | 4 | 5 | 27 | 134,217,727 |
| 111 01 | 5 | 5 | 35 | 34,359,738,367 |
| 111 10 | 6 | 5 | 43 | 8,796,093,022,207 |
| 111 11 000 | 8 | 8 | 56 | 72,057,594,037,927,935 |
| 111 11 001 |  9 | 8 | 64 | A full 64-bit value with one byte overhead |
| 111 11 010 | 17 | 8 | 128 | A GUID/UUID |
| 111 11 111 |  n | 8 | any | Any multi-precision integer |

This is a nice compromise between arbitrary length and efficient encoding
for small numbers.

The document is unclear about what happens in the 0xff case for the prefix byte.
This will be resolved here by considering the next 8 bytes to encode the length
of the subsequent bytes.  So

    0xff | 0xgh 0xij 0xkl 0xmn 0xop 0xqr 0xst 0xuv [ ... ]

where [g-v] hold the number of bytes in [...].  The value (2^64)-1 in the length
field is reserved for future use.
